this is fresh air I'm Terry Gross covet
has challenged a lot of what researchers
thought they knew about how our immune
system works the key to solving covid's
Mysteries likely involves a new
understanding of cellular science
is also leading to tools to fight
specific types of cells that have gone
Rogue or become pathological while at
the same time not attacking healthy
cells
cancer HIV type 1 diabetes and sickle
cell anemia are some of the diseases in
which this new approach is being used or
is in experimental stages
my guest said Arthur Mukherjee writes
about this new field of cell therapy and
what we've learned about the immune
system in his new book song of the cell
he's an oncologist cell biologist and
hematologist who treats cancer patients
and conducts research in cellular
engineering
in the book he also writes about the
period of his profound depression and
what he learned about new approaches to
electrical brain stimulation that are
being tested to treat depression
Mukherjee won a Pulitzer Prize for his
book The Emperor of all maladies a
biography of cancer he's also written
about medicine in the New Yorker
said Arthur Mukherjee welcome back to
Fresh Air I learned so much from your
new book thanks for coming back to our
show oh thank you for having me Ty in
the beginning of your book you write
about two cases that reveal how
revolutionary cellular modification and
Engineering can be used in combating
disease and how it can backfire so I
want to start with a case in which it
backfired and the patient was a friend
of yours named Sam at least that's the
name you use in the book
would you describe how far his cancer
had progressed when he was treated with
a cellular therapy
yes um Sam's case was a very personal
case for me and I began to book with it
partly to inject a dose of humidity
right at the beginning of the book
um Sam had a metastatic melanoma cancer
of melanocytes skin cells and it had
metastasized to his liver to his lungs
and to parts of his skin
and he was treated originally with the
surgical resection but unfortunately
after the resection the cancer was
detected to be metastatic and he was
then eventually through after some
initial therapies put on a novel kind of
therapy called immunotherapy
immunotherapy is a set of medicines
which uncloaks the cancer cells and
exposes them to the immune system
particularly to T cells which are part
of the immune system normally cancer
cells have found various mechanisms to
hide away from the immune system and
that's part of the reason that they can
survive and grow and immunotherapy makes
them to coin a word revisible to the
immune system and makes the immune
system attack them so that's the good
part what's the bad part
the bad part is that unfortunately when
you uncloak any part any cell in the
body and expose it to the immune system
you also unclog normal cells in the body
these mechanisms have evolved these
cloaking mechanisms have evolved so that
we don't develop autoimmune diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis and other
diseases psoriasis and other diseases
and so when you uncloak the the tumor
you also uncloak or activate T cells
against
normal cells and in Sam's case it was he
developed an autoimmune hepatitis which
is a very feminent inflammation of the
liver his T cells began to attack his
liver so every time I use the analogy of
you know animals training on a leash
um so we cut off the leash and they go
and attack the tumor but unfortunately
they also attacked his liver and every
time we would try to kill his tumor
cells which we could
um they would the T cells these
activated
um I would I call them techy T cells
irritated T cells would also go and
attack his his liver causing a very
filament hepatitis which we never could
control and that ultimately that was
what was the cause of death because of
this uh we couldn't pass through this
narrow channel between killing his tumor
and killing his normal cells
now let's compare that to the case of a
14 year old girl named Emily Whitehead
who was treated in Philadelphia where
our show is at the Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia AKA chop for a form of
leukemia that's cured in 90 of cases and
I guess kills most of the other 10
percent and she was in that 10 percent
and her trial involved infusing her body
with her own T cells but the T cells
were weaponized through gene therapy to
recognize and kill her cancer so what's
the difference between the therapy she
had and the therapy Sam had so in Emily
Whitehead's case is a different kind of
T Cell Therapy
unlike Sam in Sam's case we give the
patients in kisses Sam we give Sam a
drug that uncloaks the immune
invisibility of the cancer or activates
the T cells so that they can go and
attack the cancer in Emily Whitehead's
case we do something completely
different we extract the T cells from
the patient's body and then we use a
gene therapy to basically weaponize them
to activate them and weaponize them
against the cancer we grow the T cells
in flasks in in a very very sterile
chamber and then ultimately when the
cells have grown and activated we
re-infuse them into the patient's body
so it's sort of gene therapy plus Cell
Therapy given back to a patient and in
Emily's case she was about seven I think
when she was first treated she had a
complete response
she also had a very terrifying course
when the T cells get activated they
release an incredibly inflammatory
Cascade sort of like as I say in the
book it's sort of like
soldiers on a rampage and you know you
can get so much of a rampage of T cells
killing cancer that the body goes a
little circuit can't handle this kind of
attack now Emily fortunately was treated
with the medicine to dampen down that
attack so that she ultimately survived
she was the first child treated with
this therapy to survive and serves like
an icon for this kind of therapy it's
called car T therapy and she still is
alive today and applying to colleges I
hear
so just to make sure that we all get
this right so T cells are cells that are
activated by the immune system to fight
disease
correct um T cells are One Wing of the
immune system the immune system has
multiple kinds of cells T cells t comes
from thymus because that's a the little
gland on sits that sits on top of your
heart
um that that where they mature
um and um yeah they're One Wing of the
immune system other wings uh you know
would be B cells
um or monocytes and other cells are you
know literally hundreds of cells that
create the immune system T cells are one
particular wing of the immune system
and so for Emily T cells were extracted
and re-engineered to attack only certain
types of cells that's correct her T
cells were extracted and genetically
engineered to only attack uh some types
of cells a very select type of cells
which include the cells of our cancer
right
so after the T cells were reinfused
and the therapy was killing the cancer
but also causing organ failure
and then the T-cell activity was tamped
down by a medication once all that
happened her recovery sounded like it
was sudden and miraculous
um and it and these recoveries are
sudden and miraculous
um I've been treating patients in India
with
um variants of these same kinds of T
cells and
um Terry you won't believe how how first
of all how gratifying it is but also how
sudden and miraculous it seems one day
the cancer is there the next day the
cancer is uh virtually gone eaten up by
these T cells since Emily's time we've
learned a lot about how to administer
these T cells with a much greater degree
of safety now still there still remain
deaths from these kinds of things from
the overactive hyperactive syndrome that
Emily experienced but we've learned to
be much much safer and there are many
mechanisms many medicines that can Tamp
down the hyper active T-cell activity so
that this car T cell has now become
really a staple in the treatment of
certain kinds of leukemias and lymphomas
and blood cancers for reasons we don't
really understand they've never really
worked so far in in solid tumors like
lung cancer and prostate cancer and we
really fully don't understand why T
cells can attack blood cancers like
lymphomas and leukemias and myeloma so
much better than they can attack solid
tumors there's research being done now
to try to direct cells related to
immunity to tack only specific types of
diseased cells so how are these
engineered cells
um redesigned to notice specific types
of
cells that have gone Rogue or have
become pathological
there are several angles to this
one angle is to basically find something
on a cell on the surface of a cell a
flag as it were that will tell the
immune system that it's not part of the
normal repertoire of cells so for
instance this will give you a very
simple example if I was to graft a piece
of skin from another one human being to
another that piece of skin would be
rejected and that's because that's the
skin cells have slags on their surface
specific molecules on their surface
which are recognized by T cells and T
cells go in and say well well wait a
second you don't belong to this person
and they will reject them and that's why
the screen graft is rejected
um so one mechanism by which you can uh
specifically direct the immune system
against any cell type is to find such a
flag that's in that cell or that cell
type and essentially engineer using
variety of genetically engineering
methods engineer that's a T cell or make
antibodies against that flag that
molecule that Protein that's on the cell
surface and and drive the immune system
to reject that cell type
you're doing research with a team that's
related to creating a type of cell
that's never existed in biology can you
describe what the cell is and why it
might prove to be important in combating
disease and having the immune system
behave in a productive way
um yeah it's a very peculiar kind of
cell it's never it's never been it's
never existed in biology and that's
absolutely correct
um so if you think about the immune
system it has two very broad wings and
let's talk about those two very broad
rings for a second one broad Wing is
called the innate immune system and it's
an ancient wing of the immune system and
remember I talked about the first
soldiers that come to battle
um in an infection well the innate
immune system is the first soldier that
comes to bed the first set of soldiers
it has many many cells that are part of
it macrophages monocytes neutrophils and
natural killer cells among other things
the important thing about the innate
immune system is that it doesn't learn
as far as we know although there's some
experiments that have started changing
this uh traditional view but it doesn't
know or remember anything about that
infection in other words if you get that
infection again it will not have any
memory of that infection uh it'll come
again the battle will start again the
soldiers will arrive again at the same
site there will be new soldiers and they
will start the battle again
the other part of the other wing of the
immune system is called adaptive
adaptive because it has a memory it
adapts to a particular infection so
those cells are B cells and T cells are
examples of that and B cells and T cells
are unlike the innate immune system in
the sense that once you have an
infection they remember there's a
there's a memory compartment and they
remember that you've had the infection
so the next time you have the the
microbe attack you again it will
remember it and and mounted an immune
response against it and that's why
vaccines work by the way vaccines work
because they you know they elicit not
just antibodies in immediately against a
virus but because those antibody making
cells become part of a memory and they
stay inside your body until and when the
virus comes in again the memory cells
are activated and this may start making
the antibody again so again remind to
remind us innate system and adaptive
system and it's a broad broad breakage
they are they're two separate kinds of
system now what we've tried to do and
we're still trying to do is to take the
innate immune system and genetically
engineer it to become like the Adaptive
system the memory system so that it
carries with it a weaponized again using
gene therapy a weaponized way to attack
a cancer cell which has never been done
before these innate cells that we're
engineering now carry on their surface
receptors that are specific for a cell
type or a cancer cell and what's amazing
about them is they haven't existed
before because they're sort of a hybrid
between the innate system and the immune
system so these are monocytes that have
been re-engineered to attack a
particular kind of cell
so it would be as if
you had already had this kind of cancer
and your immune system knew to attack it
uh it would that would be one feature of
it and the other feature of it would be
that for reasons we don't really
understand the and I told you this
before T cells have been very car T
cells especially engineered T cells
really don't seem to be able to
penetrate into solid tumors
um they one of the most chilling images
in biology that I've ever seen is a
solid tumor where you've uh where people
have deployed T Cell therapies of
various kinds and you can see a rim of T
cells surrounding the tumor but they
aren't getting into the tumor and
um we we now know some of the reasons
why the tumors make specific factors
they make a specific kind of home for
themselves which is impregnable to
um to T cells but what's interesting
about that home is that they're not
impregnable to these neutrophils and
monocytes that we're re-engineering they
actually these one sites go in and out
come in and out without a problem so
what we're doing really is is once you
arm the monocyte or the neutrophil to be
able to kill the T cells all of a sudden
it goes in but not only does it go and
it has a weapon it's been weaponized to
kill the T Cell to kill the cancer cell
pardon me and so it it it really is a
hybrid but it's using some natural
ability of these monocytes to be able to
traffic in and out effortlessly between
inside solid tumors well can you imagine
if this actually worked and became a
standard cancer therapy I mean that
would be remarkable and wonderful and
you would be one of the people
responsible for it so can you talk a
little bit about the excitement of
working on a project like this and the
frustration of not having any immediate
answer about whether it's going to work
or not this kind of thing probably takes
years right it takes years and
um it's a project I should say that
we're doing collaboration with another
scientist named Ron whale and there's a
big team in Boston that's carrying out
the research um it's hard for me to
convey the excitement that's sweeping
through the whole field of Cell Biology
biology Life Sciences in general has
three pillars
um incredible pillars
um the three basic rules I mean for a
long time
physicists would disdain biologists you
know we were the Lesser scientists you
know the people who brought them coffee
but in the end perhaps we have the last
laugh because physicists are still
searching for theories their General
unifying theories biologists have three
General unifying theories the first
theory is a theory of evolution
which should be taught in schools
um I should say and the second is uh is
cell theory the fact that all organisms
are made out of cells and the third is
the genetic theory so the theory of
inheritance and the genetic code and the
universality of it across all animals
and plants and bacteria so these three
theories are the pillars of of biology
and it's it felt to me that of these
three theories even there are thousand
books on Evolution a thousand books on
genetics and very few books on Cell
Biology there's all this sweeping
excitement because we are now playing
with cells we're making new kinds of
cells we're making we're putting them
into patients bodies T cells pancreatic
cells that make insulin for type 1
diabetes you know all genetically
altered cells to cure sickle cell anemia
that excitement it's it's it's very very
tough for me to explain the kind of I
don't know kind of heading
giddiness the madness the the the the
psychic I don't know power that grips
you once you get into the field and and
feel this excitement
have you in conjunction with other
researchers developed any therapies that
have already succeeded
the quick answer is uh maybe
quick and definitive answer the quick
infinite answer is our laboratory I
should say I work with a big team has
developed several therapies
um they're all in mid-trial
some of them are in late trials the ones
that are in late trials have proved to
be successful thus far but you know
there's always a question of how long
how much etc etc etc but I'm proud to
say that I have developed therapies for
humans can you explain what one of them
is well yes among other things we've
started a car T Center of the first kind
in India and done what we consider a
pivotal trial we're still in mid-trial
so we are awaiting results but they've
certainly been successes
what is the success like what are what
are you trying to change or cure we're
trying to change or we're trying to cure
among other things uh lymphoblastic
leukemia and other blood cancers among
them let's take another short break here
if you're just joining us my guest is
Siddhartha Mukherjee author of the new
book song of the cell about what
scientists have learned about the immune
system and about an area of Cutting Edge
medicine which involves re-engineering
cells to use them to fight disease his
earlier book The Emperor of all maladies
a biography of cancer won a Pulitzer
Prize we'll be right back after a short
break I'm Terry Gross and this is fresh
air
let's get back to my interview with said
Arthur Mukherjee his new book song of
the cell is about an area he says is
transforming medicine the re-engineering
of cells to fight disease including
cancer and HIV he won a Pulitzer Prize
for his book The Emperor of all maladies
a biography of cancer and has also
published articles about medicine in the
New Yorker he's an oncologist cell
biologist and hematologist in addition
to treating patients he's conducting
Research into cellular engineering as a
treatment for cancer
there's a a personal chapter that
relates to Medicine in your new book and
that's a chapter about depression which
became a special interest of yours in
2017 after your father died when you
sunk into a very profound depression and
antidepressants helped but only
moderately and you spoke to a researcher
about depression and he described
depression as a slow brain problem
what do you mean
well the brain is made up of cells very
made up of neurons nerve cells and for
the longest time people thought that
um the way the way the neurons
communicate with each other is through
chemicals they secrete chemicals into a
tiny little space between neurons and
they talk to each other through those
chemicals now for the longest time
researchers thought that a particular
chemical called serotonin was low or
missing in the brain and if you just up
the level of Serotonin essentially like
you know increasing the seasoning in a
soup
um you would
um allow the the neurons that are
responsible for depression or the nerve
circuits that are responsible for
depression to be reset and everything
would be fine again but that's not what
generally turned out to be the case
first of all if that was the case you'd
react to an antidepressant like a
serotonin uptake inhibitor so these are
drugs that increase the level of
Serotonin you'd respond to that
instantly but you don't
um so Paul greengard had a different
hypothesis and has you know continued to
have a different hypothesis
unfortunately he died but his hypothesis
was that it's not just seasoning in the
soup it's not just the amount of
Serotonin it's what serotonin does to
the next cell in fact these chemicals
make profound biochemical metabolic and
other changes in the in the second cell
in the cell that's listening that is
that is responsible not only for normal
physiology but for diseases like
depression
and that's called he called it the slow
pathway because it doesn't it's not just
sort of the quick chatter between
neurons but a much slower pathway that
takes place over maybe you know minutes
seconds perhaps days and perhaps weeks
to to change and so that slow pathway
translates to depression
green guard believed that that slopath
who was responsible for depression and
that's why these serotonin Inhibitors uh
uptake Inhibitors sorry which increase
the level of Serotonin don't work
instantly you have to make very slow
changes in cells change their physiology
change their metabolism change their
biochemistry change the proteins that
they're making in order to change the
neural circuits that are responsible for
depression so that's why he believed
that it was the slow pathway and in fact
he'd found some very promising evidence
that it was the some precise proteins
involved in the slow pathway that are
responsible for depression where do
other scientists stand on this Theory
people are beginning to believe this
Theory more and more
earlier green guard had shown for which
he won the Nobel Prize green guard had
shown that there are aspects of this
slow pathway that are responsible for uh
responding to other chemicals like
dopamine that change again the
communication between neurons and he was
just about extending so you know he
discovered that this was relevant in
Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia
and he was just about extending this
work to depression when he unfortunately
passed away
when you were going through the period
of depression did it cause you to lose
interest in your research or in your
patients
it didn't cause me to I would say
superficially know in the sense that I
could certainly continue the actions
um but there was something missing I
could sense I very much get the sense of
that and what was missing
um one of the things that went missing
was was the sense of connection both to
my research and to my patients I've
always been very connected to both
um but I could see that connection
fading away and in fact that's when I
started taking action and and really
started to go in and see you know talk
therapists and and change medicines and
really work hard on on my brain
um you know exercises is one of the one
of the best antidepressants that there
can be
um you know seasonal changes
um I tried everything and and as I said
maybe it was the slow pathway but it
slowly abated
illness can create depression or
exacerbate it do you feel like going
through a period of depression yourself
helped you understand
what some of your patients are
experiencing oh absolutely
um I could sense
um you know the sense of Doom and also
the sense of uncertainty uncertainty
itself causes anxiety which is actually
one of the most prominent symptoms of
depression often people will come and
tell you I'm extraordinarily anxious but
in fact what's going on with them is
that there's an underlying depressive
component to this the anxiety is a
manifestation of that it's a it's a it's
a manifestation of a mood disorder
rather than some kind of particular
Panic that's going on through their
brain and I think you know illness
causes one of the most profound forms of
anxiety that we know
um and so
um I I very much encourage particularly
cancer patients to seek out
psychiatric help talk therapy medicines
if needed and any kind of therapy that
will help them because it let my own
experience with with with my mood and my
mood disorder allowed me to really
understand what patients go through
let me reintroduce you here if you're
just joining us my guest is siddharthur
Mukherjee he's an oncologist cell
biologist hematologist and Pulitzer
prize-winning author his new book is
called song of the cell we'll be right
back this is fresh air
this is fresh air let's get back to my
interview with said Arthur Mukherjee
author of the new book song of the cell
it's about what scientists have learned
so far about how the immune system works
and about an area of Cutting Edge
medicine which involves re-engineering
cells to use them to fight disease
his earlier book The Emperor of all
maladies a biography of cancer won a
Pulitzer Prize
here's something a phenomenon that
researchers face called the sand and the
eye problem and that is like when you're
doing research on like a new medication
or new treatment like everything is
coming up the way you wanted to it's all
checking out except there's this one
thing that does not fit the pattern and
that contradicts the pattern
have you come across that yourself in
your research and if so like how do you
deal with that when everything's falling
into the place but this one thing seems
to disprove everything else
uh yes I'm just thinking aloud as you
say as you speak I'll give you a great
example actually
um our laboratory uh discovered along
with another laboratory at exactly the
same time discovered cells in the
skeleton uh that are stem cells for a
long time people believe that bone was
static and you can't as adults you
couldn't make any more bone or cartilage
um and we discovered a stem cell that
sits inside a particular part of bone
which can give rise to Bone and
cartilage even during adulthood although
their numbers drop so we wrote this very
uh nice and fancy Grant saying that you
know in when cartilage degenerates an
osteoarthritis big disease very common
disease neglected disease in
particularly in because it's in women we
wrote this grant very proudly saying
that um you know our hypothesis was that
that in osteoarthritis these cells would
rise up like Phoenix female sees From
the Ashes and start regenerating very
actively and they would you know
regenerate the cartilage and thereby
cure the disease and shock and surprise
we found exactly the opposite we found
that when we looked at the at the actual
tissues when when we caused injuries
these were the first cells to die and so
we started forming a completely new idea
or theory about osteoarthritis which
involves the death of these stem cells
and realized that maybe this is a
hypothesis again maybe osteoarthritis is
a stem cell disease it's a stem cell
problem and that was a sand in the eye
problem because we had always expected
just the opposite and found found
something completely different and many
of the other facts wouldn't fit until we
had found this uh this peculiar surprise
and of course our grant was given but we
had to sheepishly write back and say
actually we found just the opposite
but still it led you to a revelation
well that's how science works I mean you
know but an unfunded Revelation
you know now you needed separate funding
to pursue the new Revenue that's right
that's right it's important just to know
but that it's important to convey that
that's how science works I mean there's
a famous Keynes attributed to Keynes at
least uh saying that you know when facts
change I change my mind what do you do
sir you know this goes back to this this
very uncertain time that we had it on
the pandemic when things seemed to
change and there was this big anti-sign
sentiment that's that kept saying oh you
know scientists are Egghead idiots
because
um they keep changing their minds
but we keep changing our minds because
we retain the luxury or the prerogative
to change our minds when facts change
and in the pandemic facts kept changing
um and so it wasn't it was uncertainty
there's a difference between between
uncertainty and Authority
um uncertainty is not knowing something
Authority is claiming something or false
Authority is claiming something even
when you don't know it
um and I think that that those are two
different things and part of the
anti-science sentiment that swept
through the United States during the
pandemic was because of the confusion
between uncertainty and and and false
Authority or authority there were many
uncertainties and they kept changing and
that's part part of the reason that you
know the CDC changed the FDA changed we
had you know we had to adapt to multiple
changes at multiple times I'm not saying
they were always right
um they could have all they were
sometimes wrong they were sometimes
right but I but what I am saying is that
the scientific process s leave the fdsi
leave the CDC aside the scientific
process had to be maintained and was
maintained throughout the pandemic
you're an oncologist what is one of the
questions about cancer you'd most like
to know the answer to
I'm very interested in cancer metabolism
I'm interested in how cancers
um
attract or take up metabolites
metabolites are things you you eat
essentially fuel for the for the for the
cell and how it changes and differs from
a normal cell to a cancer cell we know
that they're different we know that
normal cells have different metabolic
requirements compared to cancer cells
and in fact one of the one of the big
efforts in my laboratory along with
several other Laboratories is to see if
those could be used those
vulnerabilities those changes could be
used to Target to make a new kinds of
cancer diets diets that would
specifically inhibit or Target cancer
cells really imagining diet as a kind of
therapy
so much of your writing is about
medicine and breakthroughs and what
scientists are learning one of the very
personal pieces that you wrote that was
published in the New Yorker was about
your father's declining health and then
his death and your your father was
you're originally from Delhi and your
father was living in Delhi when um when
he was dying and you know so when you
knew that things had really taken a turn
you got on a flight as soon as you could
to Delhi and you know he was in the
hospital at this time and you write
about the indignities the mistakes on
the part of the medical team the faulty
equipment the deteriorating conditions
in the hospital
um that your father was up against and
that horrified you but I'm wondering if
you've seen similar problems in American
hospitals because many American
hospitals are old they they appeared at
least on the surface to be very dirty
um often there are mistakes that are
made
so all of those
um are true I think
um I think the I think that there's been
there's been a great this is I've
noticed it particularly after covid
um I think there was a great degree of
doctor and nurse burnout
um during the covet pandemic
um and
um I've been involved with many efforts
to prevent try to prevent that burnout a
lot of it has to do with excessive
paperwork excessive work put on doctors
that's been building up over Generations
really
um you know we've we've converted
doctors from thinkers into form fillers
and nurses from caregivers also into
form fillers
um I you know I'm very keen to
um to find a way to to sort of declare
2020 the year of the nurse there was
this very moving moment in New York when
people would open their windows at 6 PM
in the evening if it was doing
Philadelphia as well but and and bang
pots it was really brought me to tears
for all the uh Frontline healthcare
workers nurses janitors
um Healthcare cleaners you know the
folks who wash scrubs
um and and so forth
um I think that that a lot of this has
been exacerbated by physician burnout
and nurse and and healthcare worker
burnout such that our hospitals are now
prone to looking worse
um having less
equipment having equipment that can't
come on time today I read in the
newspaper there's a shortage of mental
health drugs
there has been shortages of you know
there have been times they've been
shortages of you know very essential
medicines chemotherapies
um that we can't get so I think that
that the the malays pervades the the
medical system it's not specific to one
country tree it's specific it's all
around the world and it's been
exacerbated by covid well let's take
another break here if you're just
joining us my guest is siddharthur
Mukherjee his new book is called song of
the cell we'll be right back this is
fresh air
can I ask having seen a lot of patients
who have cancer go into Decline and then
die
what was it like seeing your own father
who did not have cancer
but did go into Decline and die and you
know it the decline took place over an
extended period but you kept seeing
signs of further Decline and knowing
that you probably wouldn't be able to
get out of that downward cycle what was
the difference for you seeing it in your
own father and seeing it in your
patience
well the the difference I think is that
when it's personal when it's your own
father when it's your own family member
you begin to live in the limbo of
uncertainty that patients live in and
you as a doctor you can sense it but you
sense it in in second person as it were
as a child as a son you experience it in
first person and it's a very different
kind of feeling because the uncertainty
um is about making what I would call
critical micro decisions extremely
anxiety producing critical micro
decisions should we move him from this
room to that room now under normal
circumstances when I'm a doctor I can be
quickly I can make that decision
um but when I was when I was a son I
found myself totally paralyzed about
these sort of you know micro
uncertainties
um and then the the second thing was
sort of when when to stop because
um and I know Atul Gowanda is written
very movingly about this but
um but but the question of when to stop
because you have a patient and there's a
glimmer you know there's a tiny glimmer
he turns his face towards you when you
talk to him but is that is that just a
coincidence or is that a sign of
something something you know his brain
coming alive again and the next day it
doesn't exist and the third date it
comes back and you you don't know
um you don't know what what decision to
make next and that's just really really
really really difficult
how did you and your mother decide when
to stop treatment
well there was a point of time when it
became clear that that if he would ever
come out of what he had he had a bleed
in his brain and if he would ever come
out he would never be the same again and
my father was very clear about his
wishes that's very important by the way
is I ask patients when they are at the
best of you know the best of the health
that they can be in to be very clear
with themselves and their families about
their wishes and to actually have that
conversation if possible in front of me
so that I know and they know and their
families know what their wishes are how
would they like to be alive and some
people say look you know I want to be
alive at all costs to see my grandson's
wedding even if I have to be in a
wheelchair and half slumped over I I
want to be there
um some people say I don't want that
life I'm done I you know I'm I'm I'm
done my father was very clear he did not
want uh to be in a particular State he
did not want to be bed bound he was a
natural Traveler you know he loved
wandering around
um in fact he was his wandering around
that ultimately caused him to fall in
and have a head bleed but he loved
wandering around he just didn't want to
be confined and so once we realized that
he would spend probably the rest of his
life in some kind of confinement
um you know there was a very moving
moment when he was totally
um uh you know out not fully conscious
and the nurse came to change his his
clothes and he the only word he would
say is no and that's when I knew that
that's we had to stop
like I mentioned that piece you wrote
about your father was so moving in
preparing my interview with you I
thought I'm going to read some of your
medical research and see what that is
like and I because you have a list of
your articles on your website and I
looked at the Articles and realized I
hardly recognized any of the words and
the titles of the Articles so I thought
okay I won't I won't read these but you
know you write in two really opposite
directions you're a beautiful elegant
writer even in your books about medicine
that aren't personal in the way the
piece of the piece about your father is
the the metaphors and descriptions you
come up with are so like easy to follow
and you know they're just like
beautifully written
but in the science papers that's just
kind of you know a language that only
scientists understand I'd like you to
talk about
those two different kinds of writing I
don't think many people can pull off
both ends of it
well so they are very different kinds of
writing but they have one similarity
which is
um I I I like to write
um what I call paired to the Bone and I
like to write close to the Bone
um and by that I mean that in the in a
scientific article that I'm writing or
Journal article I'm writing I try to
squeeze out any excess words any excess
distractions so that you can focus on
the point
um now in in in my books in my essays
Etc it's a very different kind of
writing it has to be more colorful more
Vivid in some ways use much more use
Layman's language not even much more
lose limest language but um but again
I'm trying to write to the Bone which is
to say I'm trying to get to the essence
of of what's true and often you know
often people will critique it and say
well what about you know why didn't you
add X or Y or that person's name or do
this person's contribution and I'll I'll
say well it's because I'm trying to get
to the absolute essence of of what's
being I'm trying to extract out in even
in my so-called literary writing I'm
trying to extract out things that are
absolutely essential
um to um to that and everything else in
my books is moved to the footnotes so I
often tell people if you really want to
read the book you might read a foot and
sometimes my footnotes are you know a
page and a half long
um so I think they're similarities uh
but they're also very different forms of
writing yeah you got a lot of long
footnotes in the new book yes
you know in the book you refer to the
excitement of the first time you looked
at a cell under a microscope would you
describe that moment and why it was so
exciting
um I had seen cells before to some
extent because I was working with you
know as an undergraduate I worked with
yeast and and other cells but they were
fleeting times but this was the first
time that I really cultured a seller
this was in some ways my cell
um of course it wasn't my cell it was a
cell of a mouse but um but it was it was
a cell that I had grown in a Petri dish
and this happened to be a T Cell an
immune cell it's a kind of astonishing
feeling because you suddenly realize
that you're looking at the basic
fundamental unit of life and that this
blob that you're seeing under the
microscope sort of this glimmering
refugent blob of of a cell is the basic
unit that connects Us in plants and
bacteria and RK and all these other you
know Genera and taxa across the entire
animal and plant kingdoms and that we
are made up of these things that if I
were to train my microscope on my skin I
would find that if I you know my brain I
would find them and it was incredible
because also while I looked at it the T
Cell moved and then I could sense the
sense that sort of the pulse of Life
moving through it
um and that was just um just something
quite incredible
said Arthur Mukherjee thank you so much
for talking with us and congratulations
on your new book Thank you very much and
thank you for having me Terry
siddharthur Mukherjee is the author of
the new book the song of the cell
[Music]
thank you
fresh Air's executive producer is Danny
Miller our technical director and
engineer is Audrey Bentham with
additional engineering today from Tina
calicay our interviews and reviews are
produced and edited by Amy salad Phyllis
Meyer sandburger Lauren krenzel Heidi
Simon Teresa Madden and rebel Donato
Theo Challenger Seth Kelly and Susan
yakundi our digital media producer is
Molly cevin esper Roberta shorrock
directs the show I'm Terry Gross
[Music]